docs/source/EXAMPLE.rst, before:

.. _section-example-run:

Example run
===========

This page shows the minimal execution of PARANOiD on example data.

.. _subsection-example-download-data:

Download test data
------------------

The example files consist of 2 different experiments and can be downloaded from Zenodo via following link:
https://zenodo.org/record/7733740

Alternatively they can be downloaded using the CLI with following commands:

.. code-block:: shell

    # RVFV sample:
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/barcodes-RVFV.tsv" -O barcodes-RVFV.tsv
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz" -O virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/reference_RVFV.fasta.gz" -O reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz

    # BHK sample:
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/barcodes-BHK.tsv" -O barcodes-BHK.tsv
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz" -O BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/reference_RVFV.fasta.gz" -O reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz

.. _subsection-example-execute:

Run PARANOiD on test data
-------------------------

To automatically download and then execute PARANOiD the following commands can be used:

.. code-block:: shell
    
    # RVFV sample:
    nextflow run patrick-barth/PARANOiD -r main --reads virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-RVFV.tsv --output output-RVFV --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer

    # BHK sample:
    nextflow run patrick-barth/PARANOiD -r main --reads BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-BHK.tsv --output output-BHK --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer

In case the resource 
To manually download and execute PARANOiD following commands can be used:

.. code-block:: shell
    
    git clone git@github.com:patrick-barth/PARANOID.git

    # RVFV sample:
    nextflow PARANOID/main.nf --reads virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-RVFV.tsv --output output-RVFV --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer

    # BHK sample:
    nextflow PARANOID/main.nf --reads BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-BHK.tsv --output output-BHK --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer


If another container execution system is to be used then `apptainer` can be displaced with `singularity` or `docker` as described :ref:`here <section-container>`.
If the jobs are supposed to be distributed to a cluster the distribution system can be added to the profile argument as described :ref:`here <section-cluster>`. 
Please note that without distributing jobs to a cluster all processes will be calculated locally. 
This currently uses a minimum of 8 cores and 100 GB memory which can exceed the available resources of typical computers. In this case resource usage can be adapted in the config file.

.. _subsection-example-output:

Output
------

The minimal execution of PARANOiD only includes the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>` and should provide the following outputs if executed correctly:

1. :ref:`Directory containing alignments <output-alignments>`
2. :ref:`Raw cross-link sites <output-cross-link-sites-raw>`
3. :ref:`Execution metrics <output-execution-metrics>`
4. :ref:`An IGV session <output-execution-metrics>`
5. :ref:`Distribution of peak heights <output-peak-height-distribution>`
6. :ref:`The reference sequence used for the run <output-reference>`
7. :ref:`Statistics and reports of the run and several processes <output-statistics>`
8. :ref:`Strand distributions <output-strand-distribution>`

Commit message:

Fixed typos and improve readability
* Update INPUT.rst

fixed typos

* Update INSTALLATION.rst

fixed typos

* Update BASICUSAGE.rst

Fixed typos

* Update EXAMPLE.rst

fixed typos

* Update PARAMETERS.rst

fixed typos

* Update ANALYSES.rst

fixed typos

* Update OUTPUT.rst

fixed typos

* Update FILES.rst

fixed typos

* Update FILES.rst

fixed typos

* Update CONTAINER.rst

fixed typos

* Update CLUSTER.rst

fixed typos

* Update ADDITIONAL_SCRIPTS.rst

fixed typos

* Update REQUIREMENTS.rst

fixed typos

docs/source/EXAMPLE.rst, after:

.. _section-example-run:

Example Run
===========

This page shows the minimal execution of PARANOiD using example data.

.. _subsection-example-download-data:

Download Test Data
------------------

The example files consist of 2 different experiments and can be downloaded from Zenodo via the following link:
https://zenodo.org/record/7733740

Alternatively, they can be downloaded via the command line using the following commands:

.. code-block:: shell

    # RVFV sample:
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/barcodes-RVFV.tsv" -O barcodes-RVFV.tsv
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz" -O virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/reference_RVFV.fasta.gz" -O reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz

    # BHK sample:
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/barcodes-BHK.tsv" -O barcodes-BHK.tsv
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz" -O BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz
    wget "https://zenodo.org/record/7733740/files/reference_RVFV.fasta.gz" -O reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d reference_RVFV.fasta.gz
    gzip -d BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq.gz

.. _subsection-example-execute:

Run PARANOiD on Test Data
-------------------------

To automatically download and run PARANOiD the following commands can be used:

.. code-block:: shell
    
    # RVFV sample:
    nextflow run patrick-barth/PARANOiD -r main --reads virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-RVFV.tsv --output output-RVFV --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer

    # BHK sample:
    nextflow run patrick-barth/PARANOiD -r main --reads BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-BHK.tsv --output output-BHK --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer

To manually download and execute PARANOiD following commands can be used:

.. code-block:: shell
    
    git clone git@github.com:patrick-barth/PARANOID.git

    # RVFV sample:
    nextflow PARANOID/main.nf --reads virion-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-RVFV.tsv --output output-RVFV --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer

    # BHK sample:
    nextflow PARANOID/main.nf --reads BHK-reads-M-fragment-only.fastq --reference reference_RVFV.fasta --barcodes barcodes-BHK.tsv --output output-BHK --omit_peak_calling -profile apptainer


If you want to use a different container engine, replace ``apptainer`` with ``singularity`` or ``docker`` as described :ref:`here <section-container>`.
To distribute jobs across a cluster the distribution system can be added to the profile argument as described :ref:`here <section-cluster>`. 

.. note:: 
Please note that without distributing jobs to a cluster all processes will be calculated locally. 
PARANOiD currently requires at least 8 cores and 100 GB of RAM which can exceed the available resources of typical computers. In this case resource usage can be adapted in the config file.

.. _subsection-example-output:

Output
------

The minimal execution of PARANOiD only includes the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>` and will produce the following output files if run successfully:

1. :ref:`Directory containing alignments <output-alignments>`
2. :ref:`Raw cross-link sites <output-cross-link-sites-raw>`
3. :ref:`Execution metrics <output-execution-metrics>`
4. :ref:`An IGV session <output-execution-metrics>`
5. :ref:`Distribution of peak heights <output-peak-height-distribution>`
6. :ref:`The reference sequence used for the run <output-reference>`
7. :ref:`Statistics and reports of the run and several processes <output-statistics>`
8. :ref:`Strand distributions <output-strand-distribution>`
