docs/source/OUTPUT.rst, before:

PARANOiD Inputs
===============

Explanation of all outputs generated by PARANOiD

.. _output-alignments:

Alignments
----------

Directory that contains deduplicated alignments in ``BAM`` format together with an index file in ``BAM.BAI`` format. 
One of each is generated per sample.
Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.


.. _output-cross-link-sites:

Cross link sites
----------------

.. _output-cross-link-sites-raw:

Raw cross link sites
--------------------

Directory that contains unmodified cross-link sites with all background noise remaining. Cross-link sites are provided in 3 different formats, which are separated in one directory each; ``WIG``, ``BIGWIG`` and ``BEDGRAPH``.
Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-cross-link-sites-merged:

Cross link sites merged
-----------------------

.. _output-execution-metrics:

Execution metrics
-----------------

Directory that contains general execution metrics of the workflow such as: 

1. container_information.txt 
    Container system used to execute the processes together with the containers that were used during the workflow
2. execution_information.txt 
    Contains information necessary to reproduce the results such as 
        a. Command used for the execution
        b. Directory of PARANOiD
        c. Config file used
        d. Profiles used
        e. Version od Nextflow and PARANOiD
        f. Execution directory
3. parameter_information.txt 
    Contains all parameters used
Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-igv-session:

IGV-session
-----------

An ``XML`` file that can be transferred directly to the IGV.
This can be done by clicking on the *data* tab on the top left and then on *Open Session*. A window will open in which you can navigate to the output directory of PARANOiD and choose *igv-session.xml*. 
This will open a predefined IGV session that includes the reference, the cross-link sites of all samples (forward and reverse) and the alignment files of all samples.
If the option :ref:`-/-merge_replicates <merge-replicates>` was chosen then only the merged cross-link sites are shown.
Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-peak-height-distribution:

Peak height distribution
------------------------

Is included in the v.

.. _output-reference:

Reference
---------

The :ref:`reference sequence <reference>` provided as input. 

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-statistics:

Statistics
----------

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-strand-distribution:

Strand distribution
-------------------

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

Commit message:

add example for bam output

docs/source/OUTPUT.rst, after:

PARANOiD Inputs
===============

Explanation of all outputs generated by PARANOiD

.. _output-alignments:

Alignments
----------

Directory that contains deduplicated alignments in ``BAM`` format together with an index file in ``BAM.BAI`` format. BAM files are compressed binary forms of SAM files. SAM/BAM files are tab separated and show one alignment per line.
The information shown by the columns go as follows:
1. Read header
2. Bitwise FLAG
3. Name of reference sequence
4. Position of alignment (1-based)
5. MAPQ-score
6. CIGAR string
7. Name of mate read (shows * if information is not available)
8. Position of mate read (shows 0 if information is not available)
9. Length of alignment on the reference (shows 0 if information is not available)
10. Read sequence (shows * if information is not available)
11. Quality of read sequence (shows * if information is not available)


One of each is generated per sample.

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

Example: 

.. parsed-literal::
    NB501399:129:HLW7VAFX2:3:11409:5471:17963_AAGACACTG     272     1       14572   0       23M     *       0       0       CCACACAGTGCTGGTTCCGTCAC EEEEEEEEEEEAEEEEEEEEEEE NH:i:7  HI:i:4  AS:i:22 nM:i:0
    NB501399:129:HLW7VAFX2:3:11604:9407:1314_TCTGCCCAC      272     1       14747   0       36M     *       0       0       CGGCAGAGGAGGGATGGAGTCTGACACGCGGGCAAA    EEEEEEEEEEEEEEAEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE    NH:i:5  HI:i:4  AS:i:35 nM:i:0
    NB501399:129:HLW7VAFX2:2:11201:6526:7382_TCCCCGACC      272     1       14847   0       40M     *       0       0       AGTGAGGGTGGTTGGTGGGAAACCCTGGTTCCCCCAGCCC        EEEEEEEEEEEAEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE        NH:i:6  HI:i:3  AS:i:39 nM:i:0
    NB501399:129:HLW7VAFX2:1:11204:3841:14476_GCGATCCCG     272     1       14992   0       37M     *       0       0       GTTGAAGAGATCCGACATCAAGTGCCCACCTTGGCTC   EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE   NH:i:8  HI:i:5  AS:i:36 nM:i:0
    NB501399:129:HLW7VAFX2:2:11204:16119:17944_CACACCCCG    272     1       14992   0       37M     *       0       0       GTTGAAGAGATCCGACATCAAGTGCCCACCTTGGCTC   EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE   NH:i:8  HI:i:5  AS:i:36 nM:i:0
    NB501399:129:HLW7VAFX2:1:21211:6880:4260_CCACAACTC      272     1       15923   0       1S25M659N10M    *       0       0       GACCACTTCCCTGGGAGCTCCCTGGACTGAAGGAGA    AEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE    NH:i:7  HI:i:3  AS:i:35 nM:i:0


.. _output-cross-link-sites:

Cross link sites
----------------

.. _output-cross-link-sites-raw:

Raw cross link sites
--------------------

Directory that contains unmodified cross-link sites with all background noise remaining. Cross-link sites are provided in 3 different formats, which are separated in one directory each; ``WIG``, ``BIGWIG`` and ``BEDGRAPH``.
Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-cross-link-sites-merged:

Cross link sites merged
-----------------------

.. _output-execution-metrics:

Execution metrics
-----------------

Directory that contains general execution metrics of the workflow such as: 

1. container_information.txt 
    Container system used to execute the processes together with the containers that were used during the workflow
2. execution_information.txt 
    Contains information necessary to reproduce the results such as 
        a. Command used for the execution
        b. Directory of PARANOiD
        c. Config file used
        d. Profiles used
        e. Version od Nextflow and PARANOiD
        f. Execution directory
3. parameter_information.txt 
    Contains all parameters used
Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-igv-session:

IGV-session
-----------

An ``XML`` file that can be transferred directly to the IGV.
This can be done by clicking on the *data* tab on the top left and then on *Open Session*. A window will open in which you can navigate to the output directory of PARANOiD and choose *igv-session.xml*. 
This will open a predefined IGV session that includes the reference, the cross-link sites of all samples (forward and reverse) and the alignment files of all samples.
If the option :ref:`-\-merge_replicates <merge-replicates>` was chosen then only the merged cross-link sites are shown.
Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-peak-height-distribution:

Peak height distribution
------------------------

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-reference:

Reference
---------

The :ref:`reference sequence <reference>` provided as input. 

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-statistics:

Statistics
----------

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.

.. _output-strand-distribution:

Strand distribution
-------------------

Is included in the :ref:`basic analysis <basic-analysis>`.
