docs/source/REQUIREMENTS.rst, before:

Requirements
============

Requirements to run PARANOiD. Note that most are fulfilled by containers and it's thus recommended 
to use one of the options stated in the :ref:`container section <section-container>`.

.. _requirements-essential:

Essential
---------

+----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Tool   | Version      | Note                                                                                                                                         |
+==========+==============+==============================================================================================================================================+
| Nextflow | 23.04.1.5866 |                                                                                                                                              |
+----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _requirements-container:

Requirements when run without container
---------------------------------------

+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|        Tool      | Version | Note                                                                                                             |
+==================+=========+==================================================================================================================+
| fastqc           | 0.11.9  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cutadapt         | 4.2     |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| trim_galore      | 0.6.7   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| fastx_toolkit    | 0.0.14  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| umi_tools        | 1.1.4   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| python           | 3.11    |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| samtools         | 1.16.1  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bamtools         | 2.5.2   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| wigToBigWig      | 2.9     |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bigWigToBedGraph |         |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bowtie2          | 2.5.1   | Only when using :ref:`--domain pro <domain>` or running the :ref:`transcript analysis <transcript-analysis>`     |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| STAR             | 2.7.10b | Only when using :ref:`--domain eu <domain>`                                                                      |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| subread          | 2.0.3   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| pureCLIP         | 1.3.1   | Only when using :ref:`peak calling <peak-calling>`                                                               |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| multiqc          | 1.13    |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| pysam            | 0.19.1  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| R                | 4.0.3   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| optparse         |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| wig              |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| reshape2         |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ggplot2          |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| numpy            |         | python package                                                                                                   |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| biopython        |         | python package                                                                                                   |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| gff3sort.pl      | 1.0.0   | Only when providing an :ref:`annotation file <annotation>`                                                       |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bgzip            | 1.16    | Only when providing an :ref:`annotation file <annotation>`                                                       |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| tabix            | 1.16    | Only when providing an :ref:`annotation file <annotation>`                                                       |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| meme             | 5.4.1   | Only when using :ref:`motif detection <motif-detection>`                                                         |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Commit message:

add note that tool versions are fixed for v1.0

docs/source/REQUIREMENTS.rst, after:

.. _section-requirements:

Requirements
============

Requirements to run PARANOiD. Note that most are fulfilled by containers and it's thus recommended 
to use one of the options stated in the :ref:`container section <section-container>`.
All versions shown here ae fixed with PARANOiD version 1.0 and will only change with future updates.

.. _requirements-essential:

Essential
---------

+----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|   Tool   | Version      | Note                                                                                                                                         |
+==========+==============+==============================================================================================================================================+
| Nextflow | 23.04.1.5866 |                                                                                                                                              |
+----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. _requirements-container:

Requirements when run without container
---------------------------------------

+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|        Tool      | Version | Note                                                                                                             |
+==================+=========+==================================================================================================================+
| fastqc           | 0.11.9  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| cutadapt         | 4.2     |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| trim_galore      | 0.6.7   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| fastx_toolkit    | 0.0.14  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| umi_tools        | 1.1.4   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| python           | 3.11    |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| samtools         | 1.16.1  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bamtools         | 2.5.2   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| wigToBigWig      | 2.9     |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bigWigToBedGraph |         |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bowtie2          | 2.5.1   | Only when using :ref:`--domain pro <domain>` or running the :ref:`transcript analysis <transcript-analysis>`     |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| STAR             | 2.7.10b | Only when using :ref:`--domain eu <domain>`                                                                      |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| subread          | 2.0.3   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| pureCLIP         | 1.3.1   | Only when using :ref:`peak calling <peak-calling>`                                                               |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| multiqc          | 1.13    |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| pysam            | 0.19.1  |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| R                | 4.0.3   |                                                                                                                  |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| optparse         |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| wig              |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| reshape2         |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ggplot2          |         | R package                                                                                                        |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| numpy            |         | python package                                                                                                   |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| biopython        |         | python package                                                                                                   |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| gff3sort.pl      | 1.0.0   | Only when providing an :ref:`annotation file <annotation>`                                                       |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| bgzip            | 1.16    | Only when providing an :ref:`annotation file <annotation>`                                                       |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| tabix            | 1.16    | Only when providing an :ref:`annotation file <annotation>`                                                       |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| meme             | 5.4.1   | Only when using :ref:`motif detection <motif-detection>`                                                         |
+------------------+---------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
